[D1] D1 API tutorial (#15779)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/d1/tutorials/build-an-api-to-access-d1/index.md

To access a D1 database outside of a Worker project, you need to create an API using a Worker. Your application can then securely interact with this API to run D1 queries.

{{<Aside type="note">}}

The tutorial does not cover how to sanitize SQL queries. Please ensure that you sanitize query statements before executing them.

{{</Aside>}}

## Prerequisites

{{<render file="_prereqs.md" productFolder="workers">}}

## 1. Create a new project

Use [C3](/learning-paths/workers/get-started/c3-and-wrangler/#c3), the command-line tool for Cloudflare's developer products, to create a new directory and initialize a new Worker project:

```sh
$ npm create cloudflare d1-http
```

In your terminal, you will be asked a series of questions related to your project. Choose the following options:

- For the `What type of application do you want to create?` prompt, select `"Hello World" Worker`.
- For the `Do you want to use TypeScript?` prompt, select `Yes`.

> - For the `Do you want to use git for version control?` prompt, select `Yes`.

Reviewer: Question was not triggered on my end.

Author: Ah, that is interesting. Might be a wrangler error? Every time I run the `c3 create` command, I get the question. Let me investigate.

Reviewer: This question is only triggered if you have git configured. Chatted with the C3 team and a fix will be coming soon that displays a warning if git is not configured.

- For the `Do you want to deploy your application?` prompt, select `No`.

To start developing, change into your new project directory:

```sh
$ cd d1-http
```

## 2. Install Hono

In this tutorial, you will use [Hono](https://github.com/honojs/hono), an Express.js-style framework, to build the API. To use Hono in this project, install it using `npm`:

```sh
$ npm install hono
```

## 3. Initialise the application

In the `src/index.ts` file, import the required packages, initialize a new Hono application, and configure the following middleware:

- [Bearer Auth](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/bearer-auth): Adds authentication to the API.
- [Logger](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/logger): Allows monitoring the flow of requests and responses.
- [Pretty JSON](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/pretty-json): Enables "JSON pretty print" for JSON response bodies.

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---
import { Hono } from 'hono';
import { bearerAuth } from 'hono/bearer-auth';
import { logger } from 'hono/logger';
import { prettyJSON } from 'hono/pretty-json';

type Bindings = {
	DB: D1Database;
};

const app = new Hono<{ Bindings: Bindings }>();

> // update the token value

Reviewer 2: Would it make more sense to add this as a [secret to your worker](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/configuration/secrets/) and then access it that way?

Author: Good call! Updated the steps

## 5. Create a database

If you don't have a D1 database already, you can create a new database with `wrangler d1 create`:

```sh
$ npx wrangler d1 create d1-http-example
```

You might be asked to login to your Cloudflare. Once logged in, the command will create a new D1 database. You should see a similar output in your terminal.

```txt
✅ Successfully created DB 'd1-http-example' in region EEUR
Created your new D1 database.

[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB" # i.e. available in your Worker on env.DB
database_name = "d1-http-example"
database_id = "1234567890"
```

Make a note of the displayed `database_name` and `database_id`. You will use this to reference to the database by creating a [binding](/workers/runtime-apis/bindings/).

Open the `wrangler.toml` file, Wrangler's configuration file. Add the following binding in the file. Make sure that the `database_name` and the `database_id` are correct.

```toml
[[d1_databases]]
binding = "DB" # i.e. available in your Worker on env.DB
database_name = "d1-http-example"
database_id = "1234567890"
```

You can now access the database in the Hono application.

> ## 6. Create a table

Reviewer: Bug in D1: If you leave comments in the .sql file, it will not run and will return an error instead. This is something I've heard from others as well so until that is fixed I'd recommend specifying this in the tutorial.

Reviewer 3: @ShaheenFattoe8 Can you bring up this, related [ticket](https://jira.cfdata.org/browse/CFSQL-692), to D1 chat or next weekly

Reviewer: Yep, I can bring it up in the weekly and get some thoughts from the team there. I'll write this up as an example as well.

Author: Updated the instructions and removed the comments.

	}
});
...
```

In the above code, the endpoints are updated to receive `query` and `params`. These queries and parameters are passed to the respective functions to interact with the database. If the query is successful, you recieve the result from the database. If there is an error, the error message is returned.

## 8. Test the API

Now that the API can query the database, you can test it locally. If the local database is empty, populate it with some data.

Start the development server by executing the following command:

```sh
$ npm run dev
```

In a new terminal window, execute the following cURL commands. Make sure to replace `YOUR_SECRET_TOKEN` with the correct token.

```sh
---
header: /api/all
---
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_SECRET_TOKEN" "http://localhost:8787/api/batch" --data '{"query": "SELECT title FROM posts WHERE id=?", "params":1}'
```

```sh
---
header: /api/batch
---
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_SECRET_TOKEN" "http://localhost:8787/api/batch" --data '{"batch": [ {"query": "SELECT title FROM posts WHERE id=?", "params":1},{"query": "SELECT id FROM posts"}]}'
```

```sh
---
header: /api/exec
---

> $ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_SECRET_TOKEN" "http://localhost:8787/api/batch" --data '{"query": "INSERT INTO posts (author, title, body, post_slug) VALUES ('Harshil', 'D1 HTTP API', 'Learn to create an API to query your D1 database.','d1-http-api')" }'

Reviewer: Encountering an error here, query is not running properly: ```shaheenfattoe@HQC542LKFK d1-http % curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_SECRET_TOKEN" "http://localhost:8787/api/batch" --data '{"query": "INSERT INTO posts (author, title, body, post_slug) VALUES ('Harshil', 'D1 HTTP API', 'Learn to create an API to query your D1 database.','d1-http-api')" }'
{"error":"Failed to run query: SyntaxError: Unterminated string in JSON at position 81 (line 1 column 82)"}curl: (6) Could not resolve host: HTTP
curl: (3) URL rejected: Malformed input to a URL function
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: to
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: create
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: an
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: API
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: to
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: query
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: your
curl: (6) Could not resolve host: D1
curl: (3) unmatched close brace/bracket in URL position 25:
database.,d1-http-api)" }```

Author: Updated the body. The issue was with the inconsistent `'` quotes

---
updated: 2024-07-26
difficulty: Intermediate
content_type: 📝 Tutorial
pcx_content_type: tutorial
title: Build an API to access D1
products: [Workers]
tags: [Hono]
---

# Build an API to access D1 outside of your Workers or Pages project

{{<tutorial-date-info>}}

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to create an API that allows you to securely run queries against a D1 database. This is useful if you want to access a D1 database outside of a Worker or Pages project. While you can query a D1 database via the [REST API](/api/operations/cloudflare-d1-create-database), this approach is not recommende due to rate limits and high latency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to create an API that allows you to securely run queries against a D1 database.

This is useful if you want to access a D1 database outside of a Worker or Pages project, customize access controls and/or limit what tables can be queried.

D1's built-in [REST API](/api/operations/cloudflare-d1-create-database) is best suited for administrative use as the global [Cloudflare API rate limit](/fundamentals/api/reference/limits/) applies.
```

To access a D1 database outside of a Worker project, you need to create an API using a Worker. Your application can then securely interact with this API to run D1 queries.

{{<Aside type="note">}}

> The tutorial does not cover how to sanitize SQL queries. Please ensure that you sanitize query statements before executing them.

Reviewer 3: For a reader, single sentence on what is query sanitization and why they might want it. Can be very brief

Reviewer 4: To add to this - no example code we ship should ever (ever) be vulnerable to SQL injection.

D1 has a parameterized query API.

{{</Aside>}}

## Prerequisites

{{<render file="_prereqs.md" productFolder="workers">}}

## 1. Create a new project

Use [C3](/learning-paths/workers/get-started/c3-and-wrangler/#c3), the command-line tool for Cloudflare's developer products, to create a new directory and initialize a new Worker project:

```sh
$ npm create cloudflare d1-http
```

In your terminal, you will be asked a series of questions related to your project. Choose the following options:

> - For the `What type of application do you want to create?` prompt, select `"Hello World" Worker`.

Author: That's a great template! I believe it is useful when one wants to build a proper API, but not when they want to write custom SQL statements. This tutorial allows the user to send SQL statements, while the starter will restrict that. I'll link this starter in the conclusion to let folks know about this. Maybe we can have a separate tutorial focused on creating an OpenAPI compliant API?!
I also plan to keep this tutorial a bit simple and easy to follow. Which is also a reason to not use `zod` for validation like in [Matt's demo](https://github.com/elithrar/http-api-d1-example).

- For the `Do you want to use TypeScript?` prompt, select `Yes`.
- For the `Do you want to use git for version control?` prompt, select `Yes`.
- For the `Do you want to deploy your application?` prompt, select `No`.

To start developing, change into your new project directory:

```sh
$ cd d1-http
```

## 2. Install Hono

In this tutorial, you will use [Hono](https://github.com/honojs/hono), an Express.js-style framework, to build the API. To use Hono in this project, install it using `npm`:

```sh
$ npm install hono
```

## 3. Add API_KEY

> To ensure that the API Key is secure, you will add it as a [secret](/workers/configuration/secrets/). To do so, create a `.dev.vars` file in the root directory. Add your API key in the file as follows.

Reviewer 4: The API key here is never added as a secret later in the guide.

Author: The API Key is used in the code. In the deployment setup too it is mentioned how to push the secret to production. Is there something I am missing?

In the `src/index.ts` file, import the required packages, initialize a new Hono application, and configure the following middleware:

- [Bearer Auth](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/bearer-auth): Adds authentication to the API.
- [Logger](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/logger): Allows monitoring the flow of requests and responses.
- [Pretty JSON](https://hono.dev/docs/middleware/builtin/pretty-json): Enables "JSON pretty print" for JSON response bodies.

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---
import { Hono } from 'hono';
import { bearerAuth } from 'hono/bearer-auth';
import { logger } from 'hono/logger';
import { prettyJSON } from 'hono/pretty-json';

type Bindings = {
	DB: D1Database;
	API_KEY: string;
};

const app = new Hono<{ Bindings: Bindings }>();

app.use('*', prettyJSON(), logger(), async (c, next) => {
	const auth = bearerAuth({ token: c.env.API_KEY });
	return auth(c, next);
});;
```

## 5. Add API endpoints

Next, in the `src/index.ts` file, add the following endpoints:

- POST `/api/all`
- POST `/api/exec`
- POST `/api/batch`

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---

...

app.post('/api/all', async (c)=> {
    return c.text('/api/all endpoint')

> })

Reviewer 4: (Format all the code first)

```sql
---
filename: schemas/schema.sql
---
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS posts;
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS posts (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
  author text NOT NULL,
  title text NOT NULL,
  body text NOT NULL,
  post_slug text NOT NULL
);
```

Optinally, you can add the below INSERT statement to populate the table.

```sql
INSERT INTO posts (author, title, body, post_slug) VALUES ('Harshil', 'D1 HTTP API', 'Learn to create an API to query your D1 database.','d1-http-api');
```

In your terminal, execute the following command to create this table:

```sh
$ npx wrangler d1 execute d1-http-example --file=./schemas/schema.sql
```

Upon successful execution, a new table will be added to your database.

{{<Aside type="note">}}

The table will be created in the local instance of the database. If you want to add this table to your production database, append the above command with the `--remote` flag.

{{</Aside>}}

## 8. Query the database

Your application can now access the D1 database. In this step, you will update the API endpoints to query the database and return the result.

In your `src/index.ts` file, update the code as follow.

```ts
---
filename: src/index.ts
---
...

> app.post('/api/all', async (c) => {

Reviewer 3: Comment or link to https://developers.cloudflare.com/d1/build-with-d1/d1-client-api/#await-stmtall to highlight all() vs exec()

```sh
---
header: /api/all
---
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_API_KEY" "http://localhost:8787/api/all" --data '{"query": "SELECT title FROM posts WHERE id=?", "params":1}'
```

```sh
---
header: /api/batch
---
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_API_KEY" "http://localhost:8787/api/batch" --data '{"batch": [ {"query": "SELECT title FROM posts WHERE id=?", "params":1},{"query": "SELECT id FROM posts"}]}'
```

```sh
---
header: /api/exec
---
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer YOUR_API_KEY" "localhost:8787/api/exec" --data '{"query": "INSERT INTO posts (author, title, body, post_slug) VALUES ('\''Harshil'\'', '\''D1 HTTP API'\'', '\''Learn to create an API to query your D1 database.'\'','\''d1-http-api'\'')" }'
```

If everything is implemented correctly, the above commands should result successful outputs.

## 10. Deploy the API

Now that everything is working as expected, the last step is to deploy it to the Cloudflare network. You will use Wrangler to deploy the API. The deployment involves two steps:

1. Create a table in the production database
2. Deploy the app

> ### 9.1 Create the table in the production database

Reviewer 3: Numbering is off

Until now, you were running a local instance of D1 database. To use the API in production, you need to add the table to your remote (production) database. To add the table to your production database, run the following command:

```sh
$ npx wrangler d1 execute d1-http-example --file=./schemas/schema.sql --remote
```

You should now be able to view the table on the Cloudflare D1 dashboard.

### 9.2 Deploy the app

To deploy the application to the Cloudflare network, run the following command:

```sh
$ npx wrangler deploy
```

Upon successful deployment, you will get the link of the deployed app in the terminal. Make a note of it.

> Next, execute the `wrangler secret put <KEY>` command to add the `API_KEY` to the deployed project.

Reviewer 3: Do we typically recommend using the same key for local and remote?
